Roman J. Israel, Esq.
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Roman_J._Israel,_Esq.

Lawyer Roman J. Israel has been fighting the good fight while others take the credit for a small law firm in Los Angeles. He has spent years on developing a brief that will change the justice system, giving up a family and normal life to fight for justice. Short on interpersonal skills, but endowed with legal genius, Roman is the behind-the-scenes brains and partner in a two-partner law firm with his former professor.

When his partner, the firm’s front man, has a heart attack, Israel is suddenly forced to take on that role. He discovers secrets about the law firm that his partner hid from him. He also finds out that the firm is broke and is forced to look for a new job after learning some unsettling things about what the crusading law firm has done that run afoul of his values of helping the poor and dispossessed. While looking for a new job, he meets Maya during a job interview. The job interview does not go well, but Maya finds herself reaching to maintain her connection with Israel.

He takes a job with George Pierce, the person his partner put in charge of the firm, if anything should happen to him. Israel is a poor fit at the big firm although Pierce assigns him several clients. He clashes with the number two partner Jesse Salinas after Israel's mockingly laughs at a joke Salinas makes about battered women which stumbles Salinas and further angers him when Israel tell's him to watch how the cockroaches scatter when the light is shone on them.

One client, Ellerbee, has been arrested for a holdup-murder; he says he did not kill the clerk but is willing to testify against the shooter, Carter Johnson. Ellerbee tells Israel he also knows where to find Johnson. However, Israel negotiates badly with the state's attorney. No bargain is struck and Ellerbee is murdered before his case goes to trial.

Israel's mishandling of Ellerbee's case leads to trouble for the firm and for Israel himself. Israel contacts relatives of the murdered store clerk and accepts their offer of a $100,000 reward for Johnson's location. The money buys Israel a new look and a new, cynical attitude. He is better accepted at work.

Maya, true to her word, calls Israel to ask him out on a date, even though the talk he gave to some young students at her request does not go very well. On the date, Maya shares some of her struggles with idealism and reality.

Maya credits Israel with renewing her idealism; Pierce thanks him for fresh inspiration and begins to incorporate a social justice agenda into the firm's work. But Israel struggles with his hypocrisy.

Johnson, arrested, calls the law firm; Pierce and Israel visit. Johnson reveals he suspects Israel of the very offense which upsets his conscience: turning Johnson over for the reward, divulging privileged communications for personal gain.

Ultimately, Israel has to pay the price for his decision and is shot dead in the streets. However, true justice is still within reach, as Pierce files Israel’s 1,000-plus page brief on his behalf.
